Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm, I'm your host, Ricardo Lopez, and today
I'm joined by Doctor Claudia Pas Frere. She is
an assistant professor of bioethics at New York University.
Her current research program focuses on the development of
consciousness, including What theories of consciousness say about infant
consciousness and machine consciousness and how these theories shed
light on ethical issues. And so we're talking about
the development of consciousness and morality today. So, Doctor
Pas Ferreira, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Welcome. Thank you very much for having me.
Great. So, uh, uh, tell us first, how do
we determine that a particular being is conscious? I
mean, how do we go about determining that, for
example, an infant and nonhuman animal is conscious? Are
there particular tests that we can use or what?
Uh, YEAH, this is a, uh, a very good
question to start because it's right on, on the
focus of my current research. So, so for a
creature like us, adults, uh, human beings, we usually
rely on what we call verbal reports. So I
ask you, are you perceiving this stimulus? Are you
hearing the sound? Are you seeing this, uh, uh,
visual input? And you can give me verbal reports.
You can say yes or no, or you can
indicate with the behavior, whether you're seeing or, or
hearing or perceiving uh the uh the stimulus. Uh,
SO, in other cases where you don't have reports,
you have a challenge because we know from our
cases that I cannot observe directly conscious, consciousness on
your brain. I cannot see your brain or open
your brain, or have an image of your brain
and spot, oh, here is uh Ricardo's consciousness. So
we need some other type of indication that gives
us an idea if you are uh conscious or
not of the stimulus. So in that case, as
I said before, we have, I can, you can
communicate to internal states and tell me whether you
are perceiving or not a stimulus. In cases we
don't have verbal reports, we have this problem that
how can we assess, uh, access, uh, internal status
in cases. That the creature cannot give us a
verbal indication that they are perceiving or not. Uh,
IN the animal case, we can train animals to
give us some indications with their behavior. So we
can train, uh, for instance, uh, a monkey to
push a button when you see an image on
the screen, OK. Uh, OR you can observe the
way they behave if they have some certain kind
of behavior that we think goes together, goes, uh,
uh, correlates with consciousness, and you might get in
conclusion that they might, uh, uh, perceiving that behavior
or performing that behavior, giving a conscious states they
have. Uh, IN the case of infants, we have
a challenge because, uh, we cannot train, uh, young,
uh, uh, infants, uh, young infants, when I say
young infants very young, like 1 month, 2 months
newborns, so we cannot train them to give us,
even with their behavior indications if they're conscious or
not. OK. So how can we know whether they
are perceiving or hearing or seeing a stimulus consciously.
So usually we have some sort of behaviors that
we think correlated with cautious, that is some sort
of indication, uh, but we cannot have the classic
verbal report, uh uh uh indication of consciousness in
infants, OK. And even the behaviors we have is
not a trained behavior as we can have in
the case of animals, it's a behavior that we
observe them. And we can infer from that that
observation that they might be performing that behavior given
the conscious states they have, but I can elaborate
more about that if you, if you want.
Yeah, uh, so what can we tell about early
conscious states in preverbal infants? I mean, uh, how
can we know anything about it?
Yeah, so, uh, so there are some sorts of
behaviors that we think, uh, in the, in the
early stages that might correlate with, uh, uh, consciousness.
For instance, uh, infants, they have a very limited
motor behavior. We cannot train them as we can
train animals because the range of motor control they
have is very limited. They're still developing their motor
control. Uh, BUT they can already use their eye
gaze and direct their eye gaze to certain stimulus
that might indicate that they're perceiving consciously that is
stimulus. And we can use this type of behavior,
the eye gaze, the eye direction they have, uh,
as an indication whether they are, uh, perceiving, uh,
for instance, a patch of color in the screen.
So, uh, we usually, uh, have, uh, is something
that uh we humans have, we can, once we
are habituated with certain kind of stimulus, we lose
interest in that stimulus, OK? And to regain interest,
I have to show you something new and we
can use this, uh, this technique with infants. So
if an infant is habituated with certain kinds of
visual stimulus, Uh, and we change the visual stimulus,
for instance, they are seeing a patch of red
and you change for a patch of green. And
if they regain attention and regain interest in the
stimulus, you might, it might suggest that they might
be perceiving that stimulus consciously. And you can do
the same with auditory information. Uh, SO, gain interest
and curiosity and also surprise, if you violate some
sort of expectations they created related to the environment,
this kind of surprise reactions might indicate that they're
perceiving the stimulus consciously. OK. One challenge for uh
For distinguished conscious perception for unconscious perception is, uh,
is because there are many. Percepto states we have
that we are perceiving unconsciously. So how can we
disambiguate when you're perceiving consciously a stimulus and when
you perceive unconsciously the stimulus. So behavioral indication in
this sense might be limited because uh as we
cannot ask infants if they are actually perceiving consciously
or unconsciously because they, they cannot give us those
uh Those uh answers. Maybe sometimes behavior uh response
might be something confusing, might not be completely clear
for us if the stimulus has been perceived consciously
or unconsciously. So usually we combine. Behavioral response with
uh neuro correlates of conscious, that means the, the
way our brain responds to situations of surprise and
situations where I regain interest or regain curiosity um
in the cases I was habituated with certain stims.
Mhm.
And our self-knowledge and the development of a first
person perspective related to consciousness?
Um, Yes, this, uh, this is a, a very
good question. So, uh, So for certain uh theories
of consciousness, uh, the, the, the perspective of this
first person perspective of yourself is part of uh
the conscious experiences. So some, uh, some fears of
consciousness postulate. THAT uh the, our experience of consciousness
is related to some type of perspective we have
uh related to the environment. So I, I only
perceive the environment from my perspective, from my own
self-perspective, and in this case, I can use my,
uh, my perception to actually perceive my own, uh,
uh, have some knowledge of my own state, OK.
But not all theories of consciousness think that experience
of conscious always rela uh requires self-knowledge. So I
just want to make a distinction before uh go
ahead to say a little bit about self-knowledge. So,
uh, so self-knowledge is the knowledge of our own
minds and not the knowledge of our own stages.
OK. So if I'm conscious of, I don't know,
I'm seeing uh in the screen, your image, I'm
conscious of uh Ricardo's images in the, in the.
I can assess my internal states, I can have
some introspective access to my own state, and I
can have this introspective access directly. For instance, you,
Ricardo cannot know what I'm thinking now, but I
can have access of what I'm thinking. So, one
idea is that self-knowledge is something that might develop
later. I might 11 framework might understand uh the
early stages is I might, I might be born
with conscious experience of my, my body, the environment,
uh, and conscious uh uh experience of my internal
state. But self-knowledge means knowledge of my mind. It,
it might come later in the sense that I
might need some uh cognitive development to be capable
to start reading my own mind, OK. When, how
does this might develop? So one idea is that
Our more primitive idea of self-knowledge is how we
very early uh start monitoring our own states, OK,
some sort of internal monitoring uh that gives me
some sort of confidence on uh my perceptual states.
And from this, when I acquire language, I acquire
this inner dialogue that is knowledge of my own
mind, but knowledge together with some sort of language.
But this might be something that comes later when
infants acquire language. In the early stages might be
just a sort of capacity of monitoring your, your
own stages, maybe later uh our own internal stages,
maybe later you develop the capacity to conceptualize or
create some, some, some sort of concepts about yourself.
So one classic indication of self-knowledge that comes with
an external behavior is the classic neural, self neural
recognition. When, uh, around 1 year and a half,
infants start to be capable to see the image
of themselves and that image be recognized by them
as an image of themselves. So the classic test
for this is the mirror test. You put some
uh some mark in the, the front half of
a child and you, the child see their image
in the mirror. And if the child try to
remove the mark, it's because they uh recognize that
that mirror, that image in the mirror is the
image of themselves. It's a representation of themselves, OK.
So this would be like the classics of knowledge,
but for this, uh, uh, it, uh, it, we
have already like more than a year of development.
So probably consciousness of our state, uh of our
state, uh uh of our perceptual consciousness or sensorial
consciousness is something that might uh evolve earlier in
first than the capacity to have knowledge of our
own state.
Mhm. So you've also done work on moral development.
So is morality determined by the brain in any
way?
Uh, Yes, so, um, So I think, I think
the way we, uh, the way we uh pro
process our moral reasoning, I think is related to
the uh the way our brain is, uh, Is
wired, shaped by evolution. It doesn't mean that moral
values are determined by the brain, OK, moral values
are collectively constructed uh by uh the society. So
our brain does not tell us uh whether something
is right or wrong, but probably we use our
brain to uh to moral reasoning and we use
our emotions to make decisions, uh, moral decisions regarding
what is right or wrong, uh, to do. So,
um, so one way to think about this is,
um, So probably we have one area of our
brain that is uh related to the way we
uh we react emotionally to certain uh violations of
or situations where we think there are some moral
violations and those emotions might indicate for us what
is Uh, might create some sort of reactive attitudes
if that, uh, that action is right or wrong,
OK. At the same time, we develop with language
and, uh, socialization, uh, we internalize certain kind of
moral rules that we learn collectively. Uh, AND those
moral rules might be part of the type of
reasoning, uh, we can make, and we can also
use others of our brain that are related to
more abstract reasoning to think about some rules. So,
uh, you, we might, we might use our emotions
to react when you see someone suffering, OK? And
then later on in development, I might develop some
internalization of making someone's suffering is wrong. Then I
might use this as a more reasoning, in many
cases, many other cases to reasoning. OK. Uh, BUT
what makes someone suffer or not is not determined
by our brain. What makes someone suffering or not
is a term by other, uh, uh, things related
to well-being of creatures. Uh, AND, uh, about some,
some sort of, of more rules we learn socially.
Mhm. Could you tell us about cognitive and emotional
processes like empathy, being able to identify with another's
perspective, and then what stimulation as processes that participate
in moral development.
Um, YEAH, I think empathy is, um, A capacity
we have that probably emerged with uh the species
evolution uh that gives us some guidance uh to,
to help us to read some, some context, to
read some situations and to evaluate and use our
uh empathic emotions to reasoning whether some situations are,
are, um. ARE morally right or morally wrong or,
or good and bad. OK. Um So one That's
sad, empathy has um many many limitations and many
bias that have been, been described in the literature
by many uh many philosophers, but I still think
that uh it's uh a natural capacity we have
to, uh, to be capable to access uh other
minds and understand what type of reactions you might
have. So, uh, we can use empathy uh in
social cognition. So if I want to understand the
intentions you have when you, when you're acting, I
might simulate your, uh, your actions in my own
mind to understand what type of intentions you might
have, performing X and Y actions. OK, so I
don't know if you are trying to communicate or
make some uh uh some signal to me with
your hands, I might try to understand what Ricardo
has in, in his mind, he's trying to, uh,
to say something to me or not. So I
might to use my understand of, of, of other
minds to try to understand your, your behavior. So
in the empathy case, uh, what is relevant to
the type of emotions I might, uh, uh, be
able to imagine that you have when you perform
some actions, OK. So, uh, so we, we use,
we can use empathy in social cognition, you can
use in moral reasoning. So I see some, some,
uh, some circumstance, some action or some contacts where
someone Um, I don't know, perhaps they are beginning
to violate it, OK? And the type of emotions
I feel that is a reaction to that situation.
Uh, CAN be practically coupled with the type of
uh emotions that person is undergoing, OK. I might
feel, uh, uh, some indignity because someone has been
disrespected. I might feel sad, I might feel array
with some, uh, uh, anger, and this reactive, uh
uh uh emotions uh. It's part of this is
empatic feelings that reveals to me what that person
is feeling in that situation. And from this, I
might, it might help me to uh to arrive
at some sort of moral judgment of what the
situation is right or wrong, and And helps also,
I think empathy also uh has a motivational component
for you to act uh in, in the behalf
of the person. Mhm.
So, let me ask you then one last question.
Do you think that empathy can help us being
respectful of people whose communication is impaired and so
we cannot apprehend their point of view as well,
like people with intellectual disabilities?
Uh, YES, I think, uh, empathy can be very
helpful to, uh, to grasp the perspective of others.
So I think empathy is a skill we can
train, we can, um, learning how to empathize better
with uh others' perspective. So the, the The case
of, of, of people with severe uh learning impairment
or severe cognitive impairment. Uh, IS a challenge for
us because, uh, they are so far away in
terms of communication, OK, so our relationship with someone
with impairment or the severe impairment that didn't develop
language communication is a challenge because it's very hard
to grasp actually what is, what is in the
perspective of that person. So some, uh, some atheists
think that because we cannot, uh, uh, grasp or
identify with their, their positions, it might be hard
for us to know what would be moral, uh,
morally wrong or right to, to do with them.
Uh, SO we would, we not have this type
of identification with that. Uh, I, I think that
empathy can be an ability and skills that can
help us to bridge this gap between, um, What
is the type of mind we have and what,
what, what it's like or what, what it's like
to be a severely impaired person. And once, once
we are capable to use our empathic abilities to
grasp what type of um Reactions they are having,
understand their minds, uh, this might help us to,
um, to relate with them in a more human,
humanly way. So in my paper on uh empathy
and, and, uh, severely impaired people, I discuss a
lot how The fact that we don't understand completely
what's going on in their minds, our tendencies is
to dehumanize them, to see them less humans, less
has less humanization than uh I think we should
uh. We should react to them, we should uh
interact with them. So I think empathy could be
a good guide to uh uh to reestablish some
side, some sort of um humanized relationship with them.
Mhm. Great. So just before we go, where can
people find you and your work on the internet?
Uh, YEAH, I have my, my, uh, uh, institutional
website at NYU, uh, the Center for Bioethics, uh,
is, uh, maybe it's the best way, so it's,
uh, New York University, the Center for Bioethics, and
this is my website there. I can also, I
also have a page on the few papers, uh,
website. Uh, SO we can also uh search for
my, my work there.
Great. Um, I will be leaving links to that
in the description of the interview and Doctor Pas
Ferreira, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
OK. Thank you very much. It was a pleasure
too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bortolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.